tutorial-go/README.md, before:

# Go Tutorial - Building AI Agents Step by Step

This tutorial walks you through building AI agent components in Go, from basic concepts to advanced patterns.

## 🎯 Learning Path

### Phase 1: Foundations (Start Here)

Work through the examples in order:

1. **[01_intro](../examples-go/01_intro/)** - Basic LLM interaction
2. **[03_translation](../examples-go/03_translation/)** - System prompts
3. **[04_think](../examples-go/04_think/)** - Reasoning
4. **[05_batch](../examples-go/05_batch/)** - Parallel processing with goroutines
5. **[06_coding](../examples-go/06_coding/)** - Streaming with channels
6. **[07_simple-agent](../examples-go/07_simple-agent/)** - Tools and function calling
7. **[09_react-agent](../examples-go/09_react-agent/)** - ReAct pattern

### Phase 2: Deep Dive (Advanced)

Learn the architecture by building components:

1. **[01-core-patterns](01-core-patterns/)** - Runnable, Messages, Context
2. **[02-llm-integration](02-llm-integration/)** - LLM wrapper patterns
3. **[03-tools-system](03-tools-system/)** - Building custom tools
4. **[04-agent-patterns](04-agent-patterns/)** - Agent architectures
5. **[05-advanced-concepts](05-advanced-concepts/)** - Memory, chains, graphs

## 📚 How to Use This Tutorial

### For Beginners

1. **Start with examples-go/** - Run and study the working code
2. **Read inline comments** - Each example has detailed explanations
3. **Experiment** - Modify parameters and prompts
4. **Build something** - Create your own tool or agent

### For Intermediate Developers

1. **Study pkg/ implementations** - See how components work
2. **Read the advanced tutorials** - Deep dive into patterns
3. **Complete exercises** - Practice implementing features
4. **Extend the framework** - Add new capabilities

### For Advanced Developers

1. **Implement missing features** - Memory systems, chains, graphs
2. **Optimize performance** - Benchmarking and profiling
3. **Production deployment** - Docker, monitoring, scaling
4. **Contribute back** - Share your improvements

## 🛠️ Tutorial Structure

Each advanced tutorial includes:

- **README.md** - Concept explanation and learning objectives
- **starter/** - Starting point with TODO markers
- **solution/** - Complete implementation
- **tests/** - Test cases to verify your implementation
- **examples/** - Practical usage examples

## 🎓 Learning Objectives

By completing this tutorial, you'll understand:

### Go-Specific Skills
- ✅ Interface-based design in Go
- ✅ Context for cancellation and timeouts
- ✅ Channels for streaming data
- ✅ Goroutines for concurrency
- ✅ Error handling patterns
- ✅ Resource management with defer

### AI Agent Concepts
- ✅ LLM interaction and prompting
- ✅ Tool/function calling
- ✅ Agent reasoning patterns (ReAct)
- ✅ Message-driven architecture
- ✅ State management
- ✅ Composable components

### Architecture Patterns
- ✅ Runnable interface pattern
- ✅ Builder pattern for configuration
- ✅ Registry pattern for tools
- ✅ Strategy pattern for agents
- ✅ Observer pattern for callbacks

## 📖 Recommended Reading Order

### Week 1-2: Basics
- Run all examples in examples-go/
- Read pkg/core/ implementations
- Understand Runnable pattern

### Week 3-4: Tools & Agents
- Study pkg/tools/ and pkg/agents/
- Implement custom tools
- Build a simple agent

### Week 5-6: Advanced
- Complete advanced tutorials
- Implement memory systems
- Build chains and graphs

### Week 7-8: Project
- Build a complete application
- Deploy to production
- Optimize performance

## 🚀 Getting Started

```bash
# 1. Complete setup first (see QUICKSTART_GO.md)
make deps
make build

# 2. Run examples to understand concepts
make run-intro
make run-agent
make run-react

# 3. Study the implementations
cd pkg/core
# Read runnable.go, message.go, context.go

# 4. Try advanced tutorials
cd tutorial-go/01-core-patterns
# Follow the README.md
```

## 💡 Tips for Success

1. **Understand before implementing** - Read the concept first
2. **Type the code yourself** - Don't just copy/paste
3. **Break things** - Experiment to learn
4. **Read error messages** - Go's compiler helps you learn
5. **Use the debugger** - Step through code to understand flow
6. **Write tests** - Verify your understanding
7. **Ask questions** - Check issues or discussions

## 🤝 Contributing

Found a better way to explain something? Want to add a tutorial?

1. Create a new tutorial in `tutorial-go/XX-topic-name/`
2. Include starter, solution, and tests
3. Update this README
4. Submit a pull request

## 📚 Additional Resources

### Go Learning
- [Go Tour](https://go.dev/tour/)
- [Effective Go](https://go.dev/doc/effective_go)
- [Go by Example](https://gobyexample.com/)

### AI/LLM Concepts
- [Prompt Engineering Guide](https://www.promptingguide.ai/)
- [ReAct Paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2210.03629)
- [LangChain Concepts](https://docs.langchain.com/docs/)

### Architecture Patterns
- [Design Patterns in Go](https://refactoring.guru/design-patterns/go)
- [Go Concurrency Patterns](https://go.dev/blog/pipelines)

## 🎯 Next Steps

After completing this tutorial:

1. **Build a real project** - Apply what you learned
2. **Explore frameworks** - Try LangChainGo, ChromaDB, etc.
3. **Optimize** - Profile and improve performance
4. **Deploy** - Put your agent in production
5. **Share** - Write about your experience

Happy learning! 🚀

Commit message:

Migrate comprehensive tutorial from JavaScript to Go
Convert the original JavaScript tutorial to idiomatic Go while preserving pedagogical approach:

Added:
- tutorial-go/01-core-patterns/01-runnable/lesson.md
  * Complete lesson on Runnable pattern
  * Go-specific implementations with context, channels, goroutines
  * Code examples comparing JS approach to Go approach
  * 4 exercises planned

Updated:
- tutorial-go/README.md - Match original tutorial intro and philosophy
- tutorial-go/01-core-patterns/README.md - Explain the "why" behind abstractions

Key Go adaptations:
- context.Context for cancellation/timeouts
- Channels for streaming
- Goroutines for parallel batch processing
- Interface-based composition
- Type safety with interfaces (optional generics)

Next: Add lessons 02-messages, 03-llm-wrapper, 04-context, and all exercises with starter/solution code.

Co-authored-by: factory-droid[bot] <138933559+factory-droid[bot]@users.noreply.github.com>

tutorial-go/README.md, after:

# AI Agents Framework Tutorial - Go Edition

Welcome to the step-by-step tutorial for building your own AI agent framework in Go!

This tutorial teaches you to build a **lightweight, educational AI agent framework** with the same core concepts as LangChain, but with simpler implementations designed for learning.

Instead of diving into complex framework codebases, you'll rebuild key patterns yourself with clear, educational Go code. By the end, you'll understand what frameworks are actually doing, making you far more effective at using them.

**What you'll implement:**
- Runnable interface (composability pattern)
- Message types (structured conversations)
- LLM wrappers (model integration)
- Tools system (function calling)
- Agents (decision-making loops)
- Advanced patterns (chains, memory, graphs)

**What makes this different:**
- Go-idiomatic implementations
- Type-safe with interfaces
- Concurrency with goroutines
- Real, working code (not pseudocode)
- Educational focus (understanding over completeness)

Build it yourself. Understand it deeply. Use frameworks confidently.

## 🎯 Learning Path

### Phase 1: Foundations (Start Here)

Work through the examples in order:

1. **[01_intro](../examples-go/01_intro/)** - Basic LLM interaction
2. **[03_translation](../examples-go/03_translation/)** - System prompts
3. **[04_think](../examples-go/04_think/)** - Reasoning
4. **[05_batch](../examples-go/05_batch/)** - Parallel processing with goroutines
5. **[06_coding](../examples-go/06_coding/)** - Streaming with channels
6. **[07_simple-agent](../examples-go/07_simple-agent/)** - Tools and function calling
7. **[09_react-agent](../examples-go/09_react-agent/)** - ReAct pattern

### Phase 2: Deep Dive (Advanced)

Learn the architecture by building components:

1. **[01-core-patterns](01-core-patterns/)** - Runnable, Messages, Context
2. **[02-llm-integration](02-llm-integration/)** - LLM wrapper patterns
3. **[03-tools-system](03-tools-system/)** - Building custom tools
4. **[04-agent-patterns](04-agent-patterns/)** - Agent architectures
5. **[05-advanced-concepts](05-advanced-concepts/)** - Memory, chains, graphs

## 📚 How to Use This Tutorial

### For Beginners

1. **Start with examples-go/** - Run and study the working code
2. **Read inline comments** - Each example has detailed explanations
3. **Experiment** - Modify parameters and prompts
4. **Build something** - Create your own tool or agent

### For Intermediate Developers

1. **Study pkg/ implementations** - See how components work
2. **Read the advanced tutorials** - Deep dive into patterns
3. **Complete exercises** - Practice implementing features
4. **Extend the framework** - Add new capabilities

### For Advanced Developers

1. **Implement missing features** - Memory systems, chains, graphs
2. **Optimize performance** - Benchmarking and profiling
3. **Production deployment** - Docker, monitoring, scaling
4. **Contribute back** - Share your improvements

## 🛠️ Tutorial Structure

Each advanced tutorial includes:

- **README.md** - Concept explanation and learning objectives
- **starter/** - Starting point with TODO markers
- **solution/** - Complete implementation
- **tests/** - Test cases to verify your implementation
- **examples/** - Practical usage examples

## 🎓 Learning Objectives

By completing this tutorial, you'll understand:

### Go-Specific Skills
- ✅ Interface-based design in Go
- ✅ Context for cancellation and timeouts
- ✅ Channels for streaming data
- ✅ Goroutines for concurrency
- ✅ Error handling patterns
- ✅ Resource management with defer

### AI Agent Concepts
- ✅ LLM interaction and prompting
- ✅ Tool/function calling
- ✅ Agent reasoning patterns (ReAct)
- ✅ Message-driven architecture
- ✅ State management
- ✅ Composable components

### Architecture Patterns
- ✅ Runnable interface pattern
- ✅ Builder pattern for configuration
- ✅ Registry pattern for tools
- ✅ Strategy pattern for agents
- ✅ Observer pattern for callbacks

## 📖 Recommended Reading Order

### Week 1-2: Basics
- Run all examples in examples-go/
- Read pkg/core/ implementations
- Understand Runnable pattern

### Week 3-4: Tools & Agents
- Study pkg/tools/ and pkg/agents/
- Implement custom tools
- Build a simple agent

### Week 5-6: Advanced
- Complete advanced tutorials
- Implement memory systems
- Build chains and graphs

### Week 7-8: Project
- Build a complete application
- Deploy to production
- Optimize performance

## 🚀 Getting Started

```bash
# 1. Complete setup first (see QUICKSTART_GO.md)
make deps
make build

# 2. Run examples to understand concepts
make run-intro
make run-agent
make run-react

# 3. Study the implementations
cd pkg/core
# Read runnable.go, message.go, context.go

# 4. Try advanced tutorials
cd tutorial-go/01-core-patterns
# Follow the README.md
```

## 💡 Tips for Success

1. **Understand before implementing** - Read the concept first
2. **Type the code yourself** - Don't just copy/paste
3. **Break things** - Experiment to learn
4. **Read error messages** - Go's compiler helps you learn
5. **Use the debugger** - Step through code to understand flow
6. **Write tests** - Verify your understanding
7. **Ask questions** - Check issues or discussions

## 🤝 Contributing

Found a better way to explain something? Want to add a tutorial?

1. Create a new tutorial in `tutorial-go/XX-topic-name/`
2. Include starter, solution, and tests
3. Update this README
4. Submit a pull request

## 📚 Additional Resources

### Go Learning
- [Go Tour](https://go.dev/tour/)
- [Effective Go](https://go.dev/doc/effective_go)
- [Go by Example](https://gobyexample.com/)

### AI/LLM Concepts
- [Prompt Engineering Guide](https://www.promptingguide.ai/)
- [ReAct Paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2210.03629)
- [LangChain Concepts](https://docs.langchain.com/docs/)

### Architecture Patterns
- [Design Patterns in Go](https://refactoring.guru/design-patterns/go)
- [Go Concurrency Patterns](https://go.dev/blog/pipelines)

## 🎯 Next Steps

After completing this tutorial:

1. **Build a real project** - Apply what you learned
2. **Explore frameworks** - Try LangChainGo, ChromaDB, etc.
3. **Optimize** - Profile and improve performance
4. **Deploy** - Put your agent in production
5. **Share** - Write about your experience

Happy learning! 🚀
